SENATE ETHICS PANEL ADMONISHES NEW JERSEY SENATOR FOR CONDUCT RELATED TO GIFTS.
WASHINGTON .
The Senate Ethics Committee on Tuesday night "severely admonished" Sen.
Robert G.
Torricelli, D-N.
J., saying he had violated Senate rules by accepting and failing to disclose expensive gifts from a former contributor to whom he repeatedly gave help.
On the basis of thousands of pages of information developed in an earlier federal inquiry into Torricelli's activities, the committee chastised him for using poor judgment and disregarding Senate rules in his dealings with the former donor, David Chang."
Your actions and failure to act led to violations of Senate rules (and related statutes) and created at least the appearance of impropriety," the three Democrats and three Republicans on the committee said in a three-page letter to Torricelli.
The ethics panel also ordered Torricelli to pay back Chang  -- with interest  -- for the full value of a large-screen television set and compact-disc player, and for expensive earrings that Chang gave to Torricelli's sister, to one of his close aides and to one of Torricelli's former girlfriends.
The committee's action comes six months after federal prosecutors ended a lengthy criminal investigation into Torricelli's activities without filing criminal charges.
The ethics panel, to which evidence from the criminal case was forwarded, concluded its review just as Torricelli is gearing up his campaign for re-election against the Republican candidate, Douglas R.
Forrester.
After months in which polls showed Torricelli well ahead of his relatively unknown Republican rival, the contest has narrowed in recent weeks.
It was the first time that the Senate Ethics Committee had voted to take action against a senator since 1995, when it recommended that Bob Packwood, an Oregon Republican, be expelled on the ground of sexual and official misconduct.
Packwood later resigned.
Sen.
Daniel K.
Inouye, D-Hawaii, who led the ethics inquiry, said he believed the investigation was thorough and fair but would not offer a detailed description of the committee's secret deliberations."
The document speaks for itself," said Inouye, who said that he considered the matter closed with the letter.
Within minutes after the committee released its letter publicly, Torricelli took the Senate floor Tuesday night to apologize to the people of New Jersey for allowing his seat in the chamber "to be placed in this position."
During nearly seven hours of sworn testimony last week before the members and staff of the ethics panel, Torricelli said that he had not taken any gifts from Chang, and that what items he had accepted from the businessman he had later paid Chang for, one person familiar with his account said.
Torricelli also insisted that he had not done any unusual favors for Chang, who first turned to the senator in 1995 for help in winning the repayment of some $71 million he said he was then owed in a failed business deal with the North Korean government.
The Ethics Committee was unconvinced.
In its letter, which was signed by all six members, the panel wrote that it was "troubled by incongruities, inconsistencies and conflicts, particularly concerning actions taken by you which were or could have been of potential benefit to Chang."
The committee criticized Torricelli for maintaining a "personal and official relationship with Chang under circumstances where you knew that he was attempting to ingratiate himself, in part through a pattern of attempts to provide you and those around you with gifts over a period of several years."
During that time, the panel said, Torricelli and members of his Senate staff took a series of actions to help Chang, contacting U.S. government officials, writing letters to foreign government officials and bringing Chang or his business representatives into meetings with foreign officials.
The committee did not confirm some of the most serious allegations, including Chang's claim that he gave Torricelli tens of thousands of dollars in cash.
The committee said it had weighed the fact that Torricelli's principal accuser in the case had been Chang, "a witness whose credibility has been called into question by the Department of Justice, a United States District judge and his own conduct."
In May, that judge sentenced sentenced Chang to 18 months' imprisonment for obstructing justice and making $53,700 in illegal campaign contributions to Torricelli's 1996 Senate campaign.
But at the time of Chang's sentencing, the judge, Alfred M.
Wolin, also said the businessman had cooperated closely with federal investigators, providing them with information that was "material and credible."
The ethics committee has the power to punish lawmakers with sanctions ranging from public or private letters of admonition to censure or expulsion.
In Torricelli's case, it acted without conducting a full investigation, saying the case had been exhaustively scrutinized by federal authorities.
A lawyer for Chang, Bradley D.
Simon, said Tuesday night that he was disappointed that the ethics panel had confirmed only a handful of the gifts he said his client had given Torricelli, and that the panel did not deal with what he said were actions by Torricelli to thwart the federal investigation."
This matter was far more serious than what the committee found," Simon said.
According to two government officials involved in the inquiry, the Ethics Committee received a vast amount of information from federal investigators, some of it under a court order issued in March.
That information included witness statements, store receipts and other documents indicating that Chang had paid for expensive items given to Torricelli, his sister, one of his longtime aides, Roberta Stern, and one of Torricelli's former girlfriends, Judy D.
Balaban.
The committee's letter did not mention Chang's reported gifts to Torricelli of an $8,100 Rolex watch, about a dozen Italian-made suits and a $3,816 antique grandfather clock.
Nor did it cite a $1,590 Oriental carpet that Chang gave to Torricelli's former wife, Susan Holloway Torricelli.
A government official involved in the inquiry said that evidence of those gifts was either incomplete or the subject of conflicting accounts by different witnesses.
The committee confirmed Torricelli's claims he had made partial repayments to Chang for two gifts: a large-screen television and a stereo compact-disc player.
But it said the senator had showed "poor judgment" by failing to reimburse him for the full market value of the gifts.
A person familiar with Torricelli's testimony to the committee said he had told its members that he repaid the "wholesale" cost of the appliances because Chang told him that was what he had paid.
The ethics panel also criticized Torricelli for taking two bronze statues on loan from Chang.
The statues, the existence of which had not been publicly known before, were displayed in Torricelli's Senate office.
Finally, the committee appeared to have discounted Torricelli's contention that he was not responsible for expensive earrings that Chang had given as Christmas gifts to his sister, Stern and Balaban.
The senator's belief "that such items were of little value or were not gifts to you under the circumstances" displayed poor judgment and violated Senate gift rules, the panel found.
According to a government official involved in the inquiry, the information reviewed by the Ethics Committee also included an analysis by federal investigators showing that during the period in which Chang claimed to have made numerous cash payments to Torricelli, the senator spent thousands of dollars more in cash than investigators could account for from his bank withdrawals and other known sources of income.
The analysis, which was assembled from banking and credit records, income-tax returns and congressional financial-disclosure forms, showed by March of 1998, Torricelli's cash expenditures were more than $22,000 in excess of the cash he had generated from checks and automatic-teller machines, an official who has reviewed the document said.
A spokeswoman for Torricelli, Debra DeShong, said he had fully accounted for all the money he had spent."
Senator Torricelli provided the committee with a full explanation of sources of income and any funds used for cash purposes," she said.
Even after the ethics committee admonished Torricelli on Tuesday night, one of his most important political supporters, Senate majority leader Tom Daschle, D-S.
D., continued to defend him, stating that the panel had found Chang "a witness wholly without credibility."
Moving quickly to make a campaign issue of the Senate letter, Bill Pascoe, Forrester's campaign manager, said the findings were evidence that Torricelli had undertaken an "extensive campaign of misinformation and deceit," and called on him to release the sworn testimony he gave to the panel.
Pascoe said, "Only then will New Jersey voters be able to decide Torricelli's fitness for office."
